Exploratory data analysis is
a highly iterative process.
But it's tempting to want
to iterate it forever.
This lecture talks about
when to stop the process and
move on to the next
phase of data analysis.
[MUSIC]
So far the examples in these lectures
have generally illustrated one
phase of the EDA iteration.
But most exploratory data analyses iterate
for a couple of times as you go through
and you revise the question or
update the data or change your model.
And usually, every new answer that
you get will raise more questions.
So it's possible to just
kind of go on forever.
Now, but the real question is when do you
stop, because none of us live forever.
We have to eventually figure out
what the answer's going to be and
move onto the next phase.
This lecture just raises a couple of
questions that you can ask yourself
to figure out when it's time to stop.
So, the first question is
really are you out of data?
So eventually, as you iterate through the
exploratory data analysis, you may be led
to a place where you simply don't have
any more data to answer the questions.
So you can't move forward.
So for example in the example about the
ozone and temperature relationship, one
of the things that we discovered was that
the relationship appeared to be nonlinear.
But what the data doesn't tell you is why
that relationship might be nonlinear.
Or how it might manifest in that way.
And so the data might suggest certain
hypotheses that you can further explore.
But eventually you'll need to go out and
collect more data on things that
you haven't already measured.
So, now if the analysis is successful and
you've answered the question
that you've set out to ask.
That's another indicator that
you're probably out of data.
Because often what
you'll want to do is get
another data set to
replicate what you've done.
Okay?
So if you've answered the question and
maybe it's matched your expectations,
it's often important
to try to replicate your findings
in an independent data set just so
you can be sure that the answer that
you've come to is actually the truth.
So this is a sign that you're out of
data and you need to get some more.
The next question that you might want to
ask yourself is do you have enough data
to make a decision?
Now data analysis is often done in
support of some sort of decision making.
Okay?
And analysis for decisions is often
different from doing analysis for
like supporting a research paper,
or for shipping a product, or
even if you're writing a technical report.
It may be that you have
enough information or
you have enough evidence to make
a decision based on lots of external
factors that are not really
in the data set, okay.
So decision making can depend
on many different inputs.
One of which may be your analysis.
So, keeping in mind the purpose of
a data analysis is very important.
Cuz if you don't keep in mind the exact
purpose of why you're analyzing the data,
you may over or
under invest resources into your project.
And so, and finally, the purpose of
your analysis may change over time.
This is fairly common.
And there may be multiple
parallel purposes all at once.
And so, keeping track of
what these purposes are and
why you're analyzing data will keep you
focused on how much you can iterate your
data analysis to get
the appropriate answer.
The next question you
wanna ask yourself is,
can you place your results
in a larger context?
Another way to ask this question is
really, do the results make any sense?
Because now,
in order to answer this question,
you may need to search the literature,
or talk to people inside or
outside your organization who
are familiar with this area and
to see if your findings fit
with what they expect to see.
Now whether your findings do fit
the kind of existing literature or
what people believe.
It may or may not be a good thing.
If they don't fit, for example, this may
lead you down a path of new discovery.
So it could be a good thing if you
find something that's unexpected.
Now on the other hand if you do find
something that is expected, and
your findings kind of match
what everyone is looking for.
That may or
may not be a good thing either.
Now in particular,
if your data match your expectations
it may simply be an indication that you
have a question that's not very sharp.
If you have a question that's
kinda vague in its nature,
then there may be a lot of
different patterns in the data
that match those expectations
that are raised by your question.
If you find things that kind of make sense
to you, it may be an indication that you
actually need to sharpen
your question a little bit,
to make it a little bit more precise.
Now if the results don't
match what you're expecting,
this may be an interesting thing, but
it definitely needs to be followed up.
Because remember for every diamond in
the rough, there are 99 pieces of coal.
So it could be that you just made a simple
mistake, and you need to check for this.
So really actually, no matter what, no
matter how you answer the question of do
these results make sense, the thing that
you need to do is check what you've done,
check it over to make sure
there's no simple mistakes.
And if you don't find any mistakes
the other thing that you might want to do
is to try to replicate it
in an independent data set.
And so if you can replicate your findings,
and then regardless of whether
they matched your original expectations,
you can have a little bit more confidence
in the fact that whatever you
found could actually be the truth.
The last question you can ask yourself
is really are you out of time?
Now, this sounds arbitrary.
But it's a very realistic question.
Another way to ask this question really,
is are you out of money, okay?
Now every project has a time budget and
a monetary budget.
And it's important to be aware of these
budgets, even if you don't directly
control them, because they will help you
to manage the data analysis process.
And importantly, you may need to
eventually argue for more resources or
more time, and you're going to have to
persuade other people in those cases.
So it's important to know when to stop the
data analysis process or the exploratory
data analysis process in order to prepare
results for presentation and to argue for
continuation of the project, if that's
what you believe needs to be done.
Keeping track of your time and
your budgets for both money and
time is an important part of managing
the data analysis process, so
that you kind of manage the continuation
into the next phase and
to argue for
more resources if you need them.
So these are some basic questions that you
can ask yourself to determine whether you
need to stop the exploratory
data analysis process.
Are you out of data?
Do you have enough evidence
to make a decision?
Can you place your results
in a larger context or
do these results make sense, and
finally are you just simply out of time?
These questions will help you determine
how to manage the data analysis process in
general and whether you can stop
the exploratory analysis process and
move on to the next phase.